I have to ask, uh,
about beautiful artificial life systems or evolution computation systems,
uh, cellular toda to me,
like I remember it was as a game changer for me early on in life when I saw,
uh, Conway's game of life who recently passed away, unfortunately, uh,
it's it's beautiful. <laugh> yeah.
How much complexity can emerge from such simple rules? I, I,
I just don't somehow that simplicity is,
is such a powerful illustration and also humbling because it feels like, uh,
I personally, from my perspective, understand almost nothing about, uh, the,
this world, because,
because like my intuition fails completely how complexity it can emerge from
such simplicity. Like my intuition fails, I think is the biggest problem I have.
Um, do you find systems like that? Beautiful. Is there, do you,
do you think about cellular Tom because cellular to don't really have, um,
<affirmative> and many other artificial life systems don't necessarily have an
objective. Maybe, maybe that's the wrong way to say it. Okay.
It's almost like it's just evolving mm-hmm <affirmative> and
creating. Yeah.
And there's not even a good definition of what it means to create something
complex and interesting and surprising all those word, as you said. Um,
is there some, some of those systems that you find, uh, beautiful?
Yeah. Yeah. And, uh, similarly evolution does not have a goal. Uh,
it is responding to, uh, current situation, uh,
and so survival then if it creates more complexity and therefore we have
something that we perceive as program,
but that's not what evolution is inherently, um, set to do. Uh,
and yeah, that's, that's really fascinating how,
how a simple set of rules or simple, uh, mappings can,
um, from, from how from such simple mappings complexity can emerge.
So a question of emergence and self organization, uh, and, um,
the game of life is one of the simplest ones and very visual.
And therefore it drives home the point that it's possible that non-linear,
uh, interactions, uh, and, uh,
and this kinds of complexity can emerge,
emerge from them and biology and evolution. It's along the same lines.
We have simple representations DNA, if you really think of it, it's,
it's not that complex. Mm-hmm, <affirmative>, um, it's a long sequence of them.
There's lots of them,
but it's a very simple representation and similar with evolution computation,
whatever string or tree representation we have and the operations, you know,
the amount of code that's required to manipulate those it's
really, really little and, and of course came alive even less.
So how complexity emerges from such simple principles, that's,
that's absolutely fascinating. Um,
the challenge is to be able to control it and guide it and direct it so that
it becomes useful. And like game of life is fascinating to look at and,
and evolution. All the forms that come out is, is fascinating,
but can we actually make it useful for us.
And efficient,
because if you actually think about each of the cells in the game of life as a
lit organism, there's a lot of death that has to happen to creating anything.
Interesting. Yeah. And so the, I guess the questions for us,
humans that are mortal and the life ends quickly,
we wanna kind of hurry up and make sure, uh, we make sure we take evolution,
uh, uh, there's trajectory that is a little bit more efficient than, uh, the.
Alternatives touches upon something we talked about earlier.
That evolution competition is very, uh, impatient. Yeah. And we had,
we have a goal. We want it right away. Yeah.
Versus biology has a lot of time and, and deep, deep time and, and, uh,
weak presser and large populations. Uh, one great example of, of this is the,
uh, novelty search mm-hmm <affirmative>, uh,
so evolution in where you don't actually specify
a fitness goal, something that is your actual thing that you want,
but you just reward solutions that are different. Yeah.
From what you've seen before. Yeah. Nothing else. Yeah. And you know what,
you actually discover things that are interesting and useful that way. Um,
cuz and Jo did this one study where they actually, um,
tried to evolve walking behavior on robots mm-hmm <affirmative> and that's
actually,
we talked about earlier where your robot actually failed in all kinds of ways
and eventually discovered something that was, uh, very efficient walk. Uh, and,
and it was because they, they rewarded things that were different,
that you were able to discover something. Uh, and I think that this is crucial,
um, because in order to be really different from what you already have,
you have to utilize what is there in a domain mm-hmm <affirmative> to create
something really different mm-hmm <affirmative> so you have encoded the, uh,
fundamentals of your world and then you make changes to those fundamentals.
You get further away. So that's probably what's happening in,
in these systems of emergence, uh, that, uh, uh,
fundamentals are there. And when you follow those fundamentals,
you get into points. And some of those are actually interesting and useful. Now,
even in that robotic Walker simulation, there was a large set of garbage.
Uh, but among them, there were some of these, you know, gems, uh,
and those are the ones that somehow you have to outside recognize and,
and make useful. Uh, but these kind of productive systems,
if you code them the right kind of principles, um, I think that they, um,
that encode the structure of the, of the domain,
then you will get to these solutions and the discoveries.